can you be a traditional person who  carries on traditions that some people  consider religious even though they  shouldn't be considered religious  because they existed long before  christianity i'm not going to go into  that rant  and i elohim  is  we  did it we get to light all eight  candles tonight  that's it wait she's religious now  that's pretty sweet i'm very excited to  have the pride i apologize if there's  any hate crimes happy to be  loud and proud  [Music]  my husband is jewish and we have been  celebrating hanukkah we do all the  traditional things we like the menorah  david says blessings and even though he  has multiple times over said that he  doesn't personally believe in god but  that he aligns with the cultures and  traditions and that feels very much a  part of him we've explained this many  times over it just doesn't seem to  resonate with some people to the point  of actually making people angry with me  for promoting religion we actually ran  into the same problem with our wedding  which i want to make a whole different  video on that because the anti-semitism  is real yes you can celebrate holidays  and traditions that people claim with  religion that don't need to be religious  mind  [Applause]  not you i'm jewish i think the hanukkah  thing throws people off even more so  this comment was actually from my  hanukkah vlog and  you know david said blessings in it so  there are just a lot of people that are  confused  and i understand so we're going to  address it again someone pointed out  that you can be jewish and not practice  the religion side of it and then she  says okay lol jews can be atheists sure  thing jews are jewish and practice  judaism i suppose the skull cat means  her husband is atheist law she's atheist  and her husband is atheist but they have  a religious wedding because they didn't  want to hurt the religious people's  feelings and instead go against their  own public stance on the issue that was  not the reason for doing it and second  of all we're not going against any  public stance i have always held this  stance that you can be non-religious and  carry on traditions that some people  ascribe to religion people think that  you can't be jewish if you're not  religious i'm very proud to be jewish  you don't necessarily have to be  religious actually when we did our  23andme being jewish came up as the  majority of my genetics it's a big part  of my identity people should really take  the time to get to know uh  especially in the jewish community get  to know their neighbors and get to know  the people that  comprise the jewish people and uh you  know not perceived that it's only  ashkenaz jews that are out there only  sephardic jews that are out there um and  i think  it's really tiring to explain over and  over again who you are and what you're  doing in school  every meeting i go like esther said you  don't look jewish  how do you become jewish i say i also  want people to feel proud of being  jewish because right now in america  there has been a huge spike in  anti-semitism and a lot of people feel  afraid to show their jewishness and i  think we should do the exact opposite  the way people think about the american  jewish narrative or just the jewish  narrative in general is generally a  euro-centric astronomic lens you know  jewish is like bagel and lox woody allen  and barbra streisand and it's very  highly cognitively dissonant jewish  stereotypes are eurocentric like what's  the stereotype of a black jewish person  or an asian jewish person or a hispanic  jewish person none of those exist  because they don't think that we exist  enough to even make a character of us my  jewishness is a bit of who i am and  where i came from the traditions that  are important to me and have been  important to my family the struggles  that my family and generations past have  gone through and surviving some of those  horrible events so i feel personally  that these are my people so yes being  jewish can be a part of your identity  can be a part of your culture and where  you came from and where your family came  from and the struggles that your people  have gone through and you can have all  the jewish identity without being  religious i certainly needed mike 23 and  me and ancestry and all the things and  nothing came back saying christian so  there's got to be a difference there  right do you get it okay you're from los  angeles oh okay  you are from  israel where uh  you're from tel aviv like  it doesn't matter you live in tel aviv  now  okay you  you  okay so in english i'll do this um  i get a frequent question from uh black  americans oh that's me yeah yeah  your weather  you're looking fab okay um whether or  not it's safe for black people to come  to israel  oh wow please yes of course because the  perception is the israelis are really  racist towards black people  so you want herself you want me to go go  for it how long have you been here i  have no idea who you are i just heard  you my name is  and i have acne don't look  but um i'm here three years three years  yes yes and i mean it depends if you're  doing a comparison scale but i mean i  think people don't like people for me  israel is i mean i get a good response  um but i think that you know we have a  bunch of subcultures here in the market  don't like to say my name but in america  being black can get you killed in israel  being black can just be black if someone  doesn't like it's not going to get you  hurt unless there's a situation where  the police officer did what he did i  don't know why he did what he did and  then my people had to go crazy but still  i told my people here  it's now in comparison to look into into  america because america we are as a  culture we are harmful so america of  course so your skin is a weapon here in  israel someone doesn't like you because  you're black because of the ethiopian  struggle because all the time people say  ah  and i go hello  you know so i mean in my in my  experience i don't believe so but i know  that there is racism but racism is  racism exists we're going to get to uh  specific examples in a quick second but  let me check with you  do you think it's dangerous for black  people from outside to come here  and no i think they're more welcome to  come here like  that like if you i'm sorry whatever hi  i will not do it  good to see you please  [Applause]  the developing world  [Applause]  they're going to fight have bigger  issues if somebody who's american  they're going to go oh you're american  okay that's my experience too but want  to check okay it's higher  oh yeah they oh they're totally arab yes  there is not now  and there never has been  a genetic  definition  of  judaism and dna technology  is improving  all the time  there will be a test one day  to establish how many of your ancestors  came over on the mayflower  how many came over with each successive  wave of ships that crossed the ocean  from europe to the united states of  america and if we want to we can  generate new traditions and new  implicitly racist cultural identities  out of this  knowable history there is no  genetic code  that defines who is  a puritan  who is  a quaker  but we can know and the testing is  getting better all the time exactly  how many of your ancestors were puritans  and how many were quakers when they got  on board that ship and decided to  participate in the merry little history  of slavery and genocide in the  colonization of north america  there's no genetic definition of judaism  what we have instead is  a stereotype  some people  look  stereotypically  jewish  and they're persecuted for it  their whole lives long  no matter how many times they disclaim  and insist  that they're an atheist  and yeah  i would know  because i'm one of them  there are some  commitments you make  not to accomplish something positive  and not to avert  something negative jacqueline glenn's  main argument in favor of our  celebration of christmas and now in  favor of her celebration of hanukkah and  of her having an overtly religious  wedding ceremony is that it doesn't  directly do any harm she has a  rather difficult time instead answering  the allegation that she is promoting  religion she dodges that one and then  just deals with this question of doing  harm  what's the harm  if you personally own  five or six slaves  and you're part of a movement  advocating for  organizing for  the abolition of slavery  why should you have to endure the  privation of suddenly not having any  servants let's say within your own house  cooking cleaning  taking care of you and taking care of  your children and and  why  should your servants  suddenly lack house and home and  employment and be cast out into the  streets just because you ideologically  idealistically  support the prospect of one day in the  future  living in a world  without slavery  the refusal to employ slaves yourself  the refusal to profit from slavery the  refusal to engage in the slave trade for  you as an individual  it may not accomplish anything  positive in the world it may even in a  particular may have some very minor  negative  consequences  but it is prerequisite  to you  taking on the role  of being a revolutionary  of fighting  in your small way  doing your small part  to create that better future  that you say you believe in  you cannot simultaneously  be a slave owner  and an abolitionist you cannot  simultaneously be profiting from slavery  and fighting  for its abolition  i get email from vegans  from time to time who say that they just  don't feel like it makes any difference  for them as one isolated individual  personally to refuse to eat meats to  refuse to drink milk  they agree with this grandiose goal of  one day living in a world that you know  doesn't have slaughterhouses doesn't  have uh  millions of people keeping billions of  animals in captivity producing billions  of tons of untreated sewage by the way  all these terrible ecological  consequences apart from the pain and  suffering the animals  although they agree  with that far-off distant goal of a  better world a better society and we can  describe that transformation also as a  kind of  abolition  they don't see the point  in suffering the little bit of  inconvenience in their own lives that  would be required for them  to maintain a vegan diet  now i have many answers to that kind of  question i don't give the same answer to  every person who writes into me or every  person who talks to me face to face but  for the purpose of this video let me  just say ditto  you can't stand up  and fight against racism you can't stand  up and fight against slavery when you  are a slave owner yourself  and you know what it's a much greater  inconvenience to suddenly be deprived of  the services of the blacksmith that you  rely on to put horseshoes on your horse  probably the woman who raised your child  from infancy as a household slave people  lived incredibly close lives of  cooperation and interdependency with  their slaves to suddenly cut that off  and start living a completely different  life tomorrow for the sake of the  abstract principle that one day  the slave trade should be put to an end  yeah you know it's not that hard when  you're at the grocery store  to think you want to buy a chocolate bar  but think ah  not this chocolate bar  and to keep looking until you find one  that just doesn't have any  dairy products in it  jacqueline  you  may not think  it would make any difference  for you to refuse to participate in  religious rituals you  may think it wouldn't make any  difference for you to say that you're  not going to participate  in a hebrew  prayer  whether that be at your wedding or  during the month of december  i'm telling you  it makes a difference  it matters  it matters for the future of the atheist  movement  it matters that you  and i  and every single one  of the people watching this video  commit  to endure the inconvenience  of refusing to participate in religion  whether those be  ceremonies rituals celebrations prayers  funerals  i have refused to attend political  events that had nothing to do with a  religion just because they were held in  a church here in canada and i wrote let  the organizers know  i'm not setting foot  in a  that committed genocide  here  in my own country  for all the same reasons that i don't go  and hang out with neo-nazis at a  neo-nazi rally even though it may be  that not a single person at that rally  not a single person waving that swastika  flag  actually has any blood on their hands  from any hate crime they didn't  participate in any of the atrocities of  of world war ii yeah well if you guys  are celebrating it guess what  i'm not gonna celebrate it i'm going to  endure  all these little inconveniences  and much more  just so that i don't disqualify myself  for the small role  that i can play  in that revolution  that's to come  and if you add it up  you and you and you if each one of us  just has a little bit  of that revolutionary spirit in us if  each one of us is willing to do  just our small  part  the revolution in the end  might not be so small  after all  [Music]  do  [Music]  you